



##  n维稠密数组 Mat

> @brief n-dimensional dense array class CVMat_Details

The class Mat represents an n-dimensional dense numerical single-channel or multi-channel array. It
can be used to store real or complex-valued vectors and matrices, grayscale or color images, voxel
volumes, vector fields, point clouds, tensors, histograms (though, very high-dimensional histograms
may be better stored in a SparseMat ). The data layout of the array `M` is defined by the array
`M.step[]`, so that the address of element $M_{i_0,...,i_{M.dims-1}}$, where $0\leq i_k<M.size[k]$, is
computed as:
$[addr(M_{i_0,...,i_{M.dims-1}}) = M.data + M.step[0]*i_0 + M.step[1]*i_1 + ... + M.step[M.dims-1]*i_{M.dims-1}]$
In case of a 2-dimensional array, the above formula is reduced to:
$[addr(M_{i,j}) = M.data + M.step[0]*i + M.step[1]*j]​$
Note that `M.step[i] >= M.step[i+1]` (in fact, `M.step[i] >= M.step[i+1]*M.size[i+1]` ). This means
that 2-dimensional matrices are stored row-by-row, 3-dimensional matrices are stored plane-by-plane,
and so on. M.step[M.dims-1] is minimal and always equal to the element size M.elemSize() .

So, the data layout in Mat is compatible with the majority of dense array types from the standard toolkits and SDKs, such as Numpy (ndarray), Win32 (independent device bitmaps), and others, that is, with any array that uses *steps* (or *strides*) to compute the position of a pixel.
Due to this compatibility, it is possible to make a Mat header for user-allocated data and process it in-place using OpenCV functions.

There are many different ways to create a Mat object. The most popular options are listed below:

- Use the `create(nrows, ncols, type)` method or the similar `Mat(nrows, ncols, type[, fillValue])` constructor. A new array of the specified size and type is allocated. type has the same meaning as   in the cvCreateMat method. For example, CV_8UC1 means a 8-bit single-channel array, CV_32FC2   means a 2-channel (complex) floating-point array, and so on.
  ```cpp
    // make a 7x7 complex matrix filled with 1+3j.
    Mat M(7,7,CV_32FC2,Scalar(1,3));
    // and now turn M to a 100x60 15-channel 8-bit matrix.
    // The old content will be deallocated
    M.create(100,60,CV_8UC(15));
  ```

  As noted in the introduction to this chapter, create() allocates only a new array when the shape or type of the current array are different from the specified ones.
- Create a multi-dimensional array:
  ```cpp
    // create a 100x100x100 8-bit array
    int sz[] = {100, 100, 100};
    Mat bigCube(3, sz, CV_8U, Scalar::all(0));
  ```
  It passes the number of dimensions =1 to the Mat constructor but the created array will be
  2-dimensional with the number of columns set to 1. So, Mat::dims is always \>= 2 (can also be 0
  when the array is empty).


- Use a copy constructor or assignment operator where there can be an array or expression on the right side (see below). As noted in the introduction, the array assignment is an O(1) operation because it only copies the header and increases the reference counter. The Mat::clone() method can be used to get a full (deep) copy of the array when you need it.
- Construct a header for a part of another array. It can be a single row, single column, several rows, several columns, rectangular region in the array (called a *minor* in algebra) or a diagonal. Such operations are also O(1) because the new header references the same data. You can actually modify a part of the array using this feature, for example:
  ```cpp
    // add the 5-th row, multiplied by 3 to the 3rd row
    M.row(3) = M.row(3) + M.row(5)*3;
    // now copy the 7-th column to the 1-st column
    // M.col(1) = M.col(7); // this will not work
    Mat M1 = M.col(1);
    M.col(7).copyTo(M1);
    // create a new 320x240 image
    Mat img(Size(320,240),CV_8UC3);
    // select a ROI
    Mat roi(img, Rect(10,10,100,100));
    // fill the ROI with (0,255,0) (which is green in RGB space);
    // the original 320x240 image will be modified
    roi = Scalar(0,255,0);
  ```
  Due to the additional datastart and dataend members, it is possible to compute a relative sub-array position in the main *container* array using locateROI():

```cpp
    Mat A = Mat::eye(10, 10, CV_32S);
    // extracts A columns, 1 (inclusive) to 3 (exclusive).
    Mat B = A(Range::all(), Range(1, 3));
    // extracts B rows, 5 (inclusive) to 9 (exclusive).
    // that is, C \~ A(Range(5, 9), Range(1, 3))
    Mat C = B(Range(5, 9), Range::all());
    Size size; Point ofs;
    C.locateROI(size, ofs);
    // size will be (width=10,height=10) and the ofs will be (x=1, y=5)
```
  As in case of whole matrices, if you need a deep copy, use the `clone()` method of the extracted
  sub-matrices.

- Make a header for user-allocated data. It can be useful to do the following:

    -  Process "foreign" data using OpenCV (for example, when you implement a DirectShow\* filter or a processing module for gstreamer, and so on). For example:

        ```cpp
        void process_video_frame(const unsigned char* pixels,
                                 int width, int height, int step)
        {
            Mat img(height, width, CV_8UC3, pixels, step);
            GaussianBlur(img, img, Size(7,7), 1.5, 1.5);
        }
        ```
    -  Quickly initialize small matrices and/or get a super-fast element access.
        ```cpp
            double m[3][3] = {{a, b, c}, {d, e, f}, {g, h, i}};
            Mat M = Mat(3, 3, CV_64F, m).inv();
        ```
        .
- Use MATLAB-style array initializers, zeros(), ones(), eye(), for example:
  ```cpp
    // create a double-precision identity matrix and add it to M.
    M += Mat::eye(M.rows, M.cols, CV_64F);
  ```
- Use a comma-separated initializer:
  ```cpp
    // create a 3x3 double-precision identity matrix
    Mat M = (Mat_<double>(3,3) << 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1);
  ```
  With this approach, you first call a constructor of the Mat class with the proper parameters, and then you just put `<< operator` followed by comma-separated values that can be constants, variables, expressions, and so on. Also, note the extra parentheses required to avoid ompilation  errors.

Once the array is created, it is automatically managed via a reference-counting mechanism. If the array header is built on top of user-allocated data, you should handle the data by yourself. The array data is deallocated when no one points to it. If you want to release the data pointed by a array header before the array destructor is called, use Mat::release().

The next important thing to learn about the array class is element access. This manual already described how to compute an address of each array element. Normally, you are not required to use the formula directly in the code. If you know the array element type (which can be retrieved using the method Mat::type() ), you can access the element $M_{ij}$ of a 2-dimensional array as:
```cpp
    M.at<double>(i,j) += 1.f;
```
assuming that `M` is a double-precision floating-point array. There are several variants of the method at for a different number of dimensions.

If you need to process a whole row of a 2D array, the most efficient way is to get the pointer to the row first, and then just use the plain C operator [] :
```cpp
    // compute sum of positive matrix elements
    // (assuming that M is a double-precision matrix)
    double sum=0;
    for(int i = 0; i < M.rows; i++)
    {
        const double* Mi = M.ptr<double>(i);
        for(int j = 0; j < M.cols; j++)
            sum += std::max(Mi[j], 0.);
    }
```
Some operations, like the one above, do not actually depend on the array shape. They just process elements of an array one by one (or elements from multiple arrays that have the same coordinates, for example, array addition). Such operations are called *element-wise*. It makes sense to check whether all the input/output arrays are continuous, namely, have no gaps at the end of each row. If yes, process them as a long single row:
```cpp
    // compute the sum of positive matrix elements, optimized variant
    double sum=0;
    int cols = M.cols, rows = M.rows;
    if(M.isContinuous())
    {
        cols *= rows;
        rows = 1;
    }
    for(int i = 0; i < rows; i++)
    {
        const double* Mi = M.ptr<double>(i);
        for(int j = 0; j < cols; j++)
            sum += std::max(Mi[j], 0.);
    }
```
In case of the continuous matrix, the outer loop body is executed just once. So, the overhead is smaller, which is especially noticeable in case of small matrices.

Finally, there are STL-style iterators that are smart enough to skip gaps between successive rows:
```cpp
​    // compute sum of positive matrix elements, iterator-based variant
​    double sum=0;
​    MatConstIterator_<double> it = M.begin<double>(), it_end = M.end<double>();
​    for(; it != it_end; ++it)
​        sum += std::max(*it, 0.);
```
The matrix iterators are random-access iterators, so they can be passed to any STL algorithm,
including std::sort().

### 构造函数constructors

#### Mat

```cpp
Mat(); //默认构造函数
Mat(Mat&& m);//右值引用构造
```

These are various constructors that form a matrix. As noted in the AutomaticAllocation, often  the default constructor is enough, and the proper matrix will be allocated by an OpenCV function.  The constructed matrix can further be assigned to another matrix or matrix expression or can be  allocated with Mat::create . In the former case, the old content is de-referenced.




```cpp
class CV_EXPORTS Mat

{

public:
   Mat();

enum { MAGIC_VAL  = 0x42FF0000, 
      AUTO_STEP = 0, 
      CONTINUOUS_FLAG = CV_MAT_CONT_FLAG, 
      SUBMATRIX_FLAG = CV_SUBMAT_FLAG };
enum { MAGIC_MASK = 0xFFFF0000, 
      TYPE_MASK = 0x00000FFF, 
      DEPTH_MASK = 7 };

/*! includes several bit-fields:
     - the magic signature
          - continuity flag
          - depth
               - number of channels
 */
	int flags;
	//! the matrix dimensionality, >= 2
	int dims;
	//! the number of rows and columns or (-1, -1) when the matrix has more than 2 dimensions
	int rows, cols;
	//! pointer to the data
	uchar* data;
	//! custom allocator
	MatAllocator* allocator;
	//! and the standard allocator
	static MatAllocator* getStdAllocator();
	static MatAllocator* getDefaultAllocator();
	static void setDefaultAllocator(MatAllocator* allocator);

	//! internal use method: updates the continuity flag
	void updateContinuityFlag();

	//! interaction with UMat
	UMatData* u;

	MatSize size;
	MatStep step;
}

```



#### 分配内存构造函数

```cpp
Mat(int rows, int cols, int type);
Mat(Size size, int type); 
Mat(int rows, int cols, int type, const Scalar& s);   
Mat(Size size, int type, const Scalar& s);  
Mat(int ndims, const int* sizes, int type);  
Mat(const std::vector<int>& sizes, int type);
Mat(int ndims, const int* sizes, int type, const Scalar& s);
Mat(const std::vector<int>& sizes, int type, const Scalar& s);
```
​    @param `rows` Number of rows in a 2D array.
​    @param `cols` Number of columns in a 2D array.
​    @param `type` Array type. Use CV_8UC1, ..., CV_64FC4 to create 1-4 channel matrices, or CV_8UC(n), ..., CV_64FC(n) to create multi-channel (up to CV_CN_MAX channels) matrices.

​    @param `size` 2D array size: Size(cols, rows) . In the Size() constructor, the number of rows and the number of columns go in the reverse order.​    
​     @param `s` An optional value to initialize each matrix element with. To set all the matrix elements to
​    the particular value after the construction, use the assignment operator  ` Mat::operator=(const Scalar& value) .`
​     @param `ndims` Array dimensionality.
​     @param `sizes` Array of integers specifying an n-dimensional array shape.    
​     



####  非拷贝构造函数


```cpp
Mat(int rows, int cols, int type, void* data, size_t step=AUTO_STEP);
Mat(Size size, int type, void* data, size_t step=AUTO_STEP);
Mat(int ndims, const int* sizes, int type, void* data, const size_t* steps=0);
Mat(const std::vector<int>& sizes, int type, void* data, const size_t* steps=0);
```
​    @param` rows` Number of rows in a 2D array.
​    @param` cols` Number of columns in a 2D array.
​    @param `ndims` Array dimensionality.
​    @param` size `2D array size: Size(cols, rows) . In the Size() constructor, the number of rows and the     number of columns go in the reverse order.
​    @param` sizes` Array of integers specifying an n-dimensional array shape.
​    @param` type` Array type. Use CV_8UC1, ..., CV_64FC4 to create 1-4 channel matrices, or CV_8UC(n), ..., CV_64FC(n) to create multi-channel (up to CV_CN_MAX channels) matrices.
​    @param `data` Pointer to the user data. Matrix constructors that take data and step parameters do not  allocate matrix data. Instead, they just initialize the matrix header that points to the specified data, which means that no data is copied. This operation is very efficient and can be used to  process external data using OpenCV functions. The external data is not automatically deallocated, so  you should take care of it.
​    @param `step` Number of bytes each matrix row occupies. The value should include the padding bytes at  the end of each row, if any. If the parameter is missing (set to AUTO_STEP ), no padding is assumed  and the actual step is calculated as `cols*elemSize()`. See `Mat::elemSize`.
​    @param `steps` Array of ndims-1 steps in case of a multi-dimensional array (the last step is always     set to the element size). If not specified, the matrix is assumed to be continuous.

#### 引用构造


 ```cpp
Mat(const Mat& m);
Mat(const Mat& m, const Range& rowRange, const Range& colRange=Range::all());
Mat(const Mat& m, const Rect& roi);
Mat(const Mat& m, const Range* ranges);
Mat(const Mat& m, const std::vector<Range>& ranges);
 ```
​    @param `m` Array that (as a whole or partly) is assigned to the constructed matrix. No data is copied by these constructors. Instead, the header pointing to m data or its sub-array is constructed and     associated with it. The reference counter, if any, is incremented. So, when you modify the matrix  formed using such a constructor, you also modify the corresponding elements of m . If you want to have an independent copy of the sub-array, use Mat::clone() .
​    @param `rowRange` Range of the m rows to take. As usual, the range start is inclusive and the range   end is exclusive. Use Range::all() to take all the rows.
​    @param `colRange` Range of the m columns to take. Use Range::all() to take all the columns.
​    @param `roi` Region of interest.
​    @param `ranges` Array of selected ranges of m along each dimensionality.



#### 模板构造函数


```cpp
template<typename _Tp, int n> explicit Mat(const Vec<_Tp, n>& vec, bool copyData=true);
template<typename _Tp, size_t _Nm> explicit Mat(const std::array<_Tp, _Nm>& arr, bool copyData=false);
template<typename _Tp> explicit Mat(const Point_<_Tp>& pt, bool copyData=true);
template<typename _Tp> explicit Mat(const Point3_<_Tp>& pt, bool copyData=true);
template<typename _Tp> explicit Mat(const std::vector<_Tp>& vec, bool copyData=false);
```
​    @param `vec` STL vector whose elements form the matrix. The matrix has a single column and the number of rows equal to the number of vector elements. Type of the matrix matches the type of vector    elements. The constructor can handle arbitrary types, for which there is a properly declared   DataType . This means that the vector elements must be primitive numbers or uni-type numerical   tuples of numbers. Mixed-type structures are not supported. The corresponding constructor is   explicit. Since STL vectors are not automatically converted to Mat instances, you should write   Mat(vec) explicitly. Unless you copy the data into the matrix ( copyData=true ), no new elements   will be added to the vector because it can potentially yield vector data reallocation, and, thus,   the matrix data pointer will be invalid.
​    @param `copyData` Flag to specify whether the underlying data of the STL vector should be copied  to (true) or shared with (false) the newly constructed matrix. When the data is copied, the  allocated buffer is managed using Mat reference counting mechanism. While the data is shared,   the reference counter is NULL, and you should not deallocate the data until the matrix is not  destructed.

#### 初始化构造函数

```cpp
template<typename _Tp, typename = typename std::enable_if <std::is_arithmetic<_Tp>::value>::type>  explicit Mat(const std::initializer_list<_Tp> list);

template<typename _Tp> explicit Mat(const std::initializer_list<int> sizes, const std::initializer_list<_Tp> list);

template<typename _Tp, int m, int n> explicit Mat(const Matx<_Tp, m, n>& mtx, bool copyData=true);

template<typename _Tp> explicit Mat(const MatCommaInitializer_<_Tp>& commaInitializer);

explicit Mat(const cuda::GpuMat& m);   //! download data from GpuMat
```



#### 类Matlab静态构造函数


```cpp
static MatExpr zeros(int rows, int cols, int type);
static MatExpr zeros(Size size, int type);
static MatExpr zeros(int ndims, const int* sz, int type);
```

​   @brief` Returns` a zero array of the specified size and type.
​    @param `rows` Number of rows.
​    @param` cols` Number of columns.
​    @param `size` Alternative to the matrix size specification Size(cols, rows) .
​    @param `type` Created matrix type.
​    @param `ndims` Array dimensionality.
​    @param `sz` Array of integers specifying the array shape.

​    The method returns a Matlab-style zero array initializer. It can be used to quickly form a constant      array as a function parameter, part of a matrix expression, or as a matrix initializer:

   ```cpp
   Mat A;
   A = Mat::zeros(3, 3, CV_32F);

   ```

​    In the example above, a new matrix is allocated only if A is not a 3x3 floating-point matrix.
​    Otherwise, the existing matrix A is filled with zeros.

 

```cpp
static MatExpr ones(int rows, int cols, int type);
static MatExpr ones(Size size, int type);
static MatExpr ones(int ndims, const int* sz, int type);
```

@brief` Returns` an array of all 1's of the specified size and type.
@param `rows` Number of rows.
@param` cols` Number of columns.
@param` type` Created matrix type.
@param `size` Alternative to the matrix size specification Size(cols, rows) .
@param `ndims` Array dimensionality.
@param `sz` Array of integers specifying the array shape.

​    The method returns a Matlab-style 1's array initializer, similarly to Mat::zeros. Note that using this method you can initialize an array with an arbitrary value, using the following Matlab idiom: 
```cpp
   Mat A = Mat::ones(100, 100, CV_8U)*3; // make 100x100 matrix filled with 3.
```

​    The above operation does not form a 100x100 matrix of 1's and then multiply it by 3. Instead, it  just remembers the scale factor (3 in this case) and use it when actually invoking the matrix initializer.

​    @note In case of multi-channels type, only the first channel will be initialized with 1's, the others will be set to 0's.

```cpp
static MatExpr eye(int rows, int cols, int type);
static MatExpr eye(Size size, int type);  
```
   @brief Returns an identity matrix of the specified size and type.
   @param rows Number of rows.
   @param cols Number of columns.
   @param type Created matrix type.
   @param size Alternative matrix size specification as Size(cols, rows) .

​    The method returns a Matlab-style identity matrix initializer, similarly to Mat::zeros. Similarly to    Mat::ones, you can use a scale operation to create a scaled identity matrix efficiently:

```cpp
// make a 4x4 diagonal matrix with 0.1's on the diagonal.

Mat A = Mat::eye(4, 4, CV_32F)*0.1;
```

​    @note In case of multi-channels type, identity matrix will be initialized only for the first channel,   the others will be set to 0's



### create.  Allocates new array data   

```cpp
void create(int rows, int cols, int type);
void create(Size size, int type);
void create(int ndims, const int* sizes, int type);
void create(const std::vector<int>& sizes, int type);
```

​       @param `rows` New number of rows.
​	@param `cols` New number of columns.
​	@param `type` New matrix type.
​	@param` size` Alternative new matrix size specification: Size(cols, rows)
​	@param `ndims` New array dimensionality.
​	@param `sizes` Array of integers specifying a new array shape.

​	@brief `Allocates` new array data if needed.


​     This is one of the key Mat methods. Most new-style OpenCV functions and methods that produce arrays call this method for each output array. The method uses the following algorithm:    

-  If the current array shape and the type match the new ones, return immediately. Otherwise, de-reference the previous data by calling Mat::release.
-  Initialize the new header.
-  Allocate the new data of total()\*elemSize() bytes.
-  Allocate the new, associated with the data, reference counter and set it to 1.

Such a scheme makes the memory management robust and efficient at the same time and helps avoid extra typing for you. This means that usually there is no need to explicitly allocate output arrays.
That is, instead of writing:

```cpp
    Mat color;
    ...
    Mat gray(color.rows, color.cols, color.depth());
    cvtColor(color, gray, COLOR_BGR2GRAY);
```
you can simply write:
```cpp
    Mat color;
    ...
    Mat gray;
    cvtColor(color, gray, COLOR_BGR2GRAY);
```
because cvtColor, as well as the most of OpenCV functions, calls Mat::create() for the output array internally.

   

### addref

`void addref();`
​    @brief Increments the reference counter.

The method increments the reference counter associated with the matrix data. If the matrix header points to an external data set (see Mat::Mat ), the reference counter is NULL, and the method has no effect in this case. Normally, to avoid memory leaks, the method should not be called explicitly. It is called implicitly by the matrix assignment operator. The reference counter increment is an atomic operation on the platforms that support it. Thus, it is safe to operate on the same matrices asynchronously in different threads.

###   release

`void release();`
​    @brief Decrements the reference counter and deallocates the matrix if needed.

The method decrements the reference counter associated with the matrix data. When the reference counter reaches 0, the matrix data is deallocated and the data and the reference counter pointers are set to NULL's. If the matrix header points to an external data set (see Mat::Mat ), the reference counter is NULL, and the method has no effect in this case.

This method can be called manually to force the matrix data deallocation. But since this method is automatically called in the destructor, or by any other method that changes the data pointer, it is usually not needed. The reference counter decrement and check for 0 is an atomic operation on the platforms that support it. Thus, it is safe to operate on the same matrices asynchronously in different threads.


  ​    

### reserve

`void reserve(size_t sz);`
​    @brief Reserves space for the certain number of rows.
​    The method reserves space for sz rows. If the matrix already has enough space to store sz rows, nothing happens. If the matrix is reallocated, the first Mat::rows rows are preserved. The method emulates the corresponding method of the STL vector class.
​    @param sz Number of rows.

### reserveBuffer

`void reserveBuffer(size_t sz);`
​    @brief Reserves space for the certain number of bytes.
​    The method reserves space for sz bytes. If the matrix already has enough space to store sz bytes, nothing happens. If matrix has to be reallocated its previous content could be lost.
​    @param sz Number of bytes.

### resize

`void resize(size_t sz);`
`void resize(size_t sz, const Scalar& s); `   

   @brief Changes the number of matrix rows.
​    The methods change the number of matrix rows. If the matrix is reallocated, the first    min(Mat::rows, sz) rows are preserved. The methods emulate the corresponding methods of the STL vector class.
​    @param sz New number of rows.
​    @param s Value assigned to the newly added elements.



### push_back

```cpp
template<typename _Tp> void push_back(const _Tp& elem);
template<typename _Tp> void push_back(const Mat_<_Tp>& elem);
template<typename _Tp> void push_back(const std::vector<_Tp>& elem);
void push_back(const Mat& m);
void push_back_(const void* elem); ////! internal function
```

@brief Adds elements to the bottom of the matrix.

The methods add one or more elements to the bottom of the matrix. They emulate the corresponding method of the STL vector class. When elem is Mat , its type and the number of columns must be the same as in the container matrix.
@param elem Added element(s).    

@param m Added line(s).



### pop_back

`void pop_back(size_t nelems=1);`
​    @brief Removes elements from the bottom of the matrix.  

​    The method removes one or more rows from the bottom of the matrix.
​    @param nelems Number of removed rows. If it is greater than the total number of rows, an exception is thrown.
​    

### locateROI

`void locateROI( Size& wholeSize, Point& ofs ) const;`
​    @brief Locates the matrix header within a parent matrix.
​    After you extracted a submatrix from a matrix using Mat::row, Mat::col, Mat::rowRange,     Mat::colRange, and others, the resultant submatrix points just to the part of the original big   matrix. However, each submatrix contains information (represented by datastart and dataend  fields) that helps reconstruct the original matrix size and the position of the extracted  submatrix within the original matrix. The method locateROI does exactly that.
​    @param wholeSize Output parameter that contains the size of the whole matrix containing *this*  as a part.
​    @param ofs Output parameter that contains an offset of *this* inside the whole matrix.
​    

### adjustROI

`Mat& adjustROI( int dtop, int dbottom, int dleft, int dright );`
​     @brief Adjusts a submatrix size and position within the parent matrix.

The method is complimentary to Mat::locateROI . The typical use of these functions is to determine
the submatrix position within the parent matrix and then shift the position somehow. Typically, it
can be required for filtering operations when pixels outside of the ROI should be taken into
account. When all the method parameters are positive, the ROI needs to grow in all directions by the
specified amount, for example:
```cpp
​    A.adjustROI(2, 2, 2, 2);
```
In this example, the matrix size is increased by 4 elements in each direction. The matrix is shifted by 2 elements to the left and 2 elements up, which brings in all the necessary pixels for the filtering with the 5x5 kernel.

adjustROI forces the adjusted ROI to be inside of the parent matrix that is boundaries of the adjusted ROI are constrained by boundaries of the parent matrix. For example, if the submatrix A is located in the first row of a parent matrix and you called A.adjustROI(2, 2, 2, 2) then A will not be increased in the upward direction.

The function is used internally by the OpenCV filtering functions, like filter2D , morphological operations, and so on.
@param dtop Shift of the top submatrix boundary upwards.
@param dbottom Shift of the bottom submatrix boundary downwards.
@param dleft Shift of the left submatrix boundary to the left.
@param dright Shift of the right submatrix boundary to the right.
@sa copyMakeBorder

### Extracts a rectangular submatrix


```cpp
Mat operator()( Range rowRange, Range colRange ) const;
Mat operator()( const Rect& roi ) const;     
Mat operator()( const Range* ranges ) const;
Mat operator()(const std::vector<Range>& ranges) const;    
```
@brief Extracts a rectangular submatrix.

​     The operators make a new header for the specified sub-array of \*this . They are the most     generalized forms of Mat::row, Mat::col, Mat::rowRange, and Mat::colRange . For example,    `A(Range(0, 10), Range::all())` is equivalent to `A.rowRange(0, 10)`. Similarly to all of the above,    the operators are O(1) operations, that is, no matrix data is copied.
@param rowRange Start and end row of the extracted submatrix. The upper boundary is not included. To  select all the rows, use Range::all().
@param colRange Start and end column of the extracted submatrix. The upper boundary is not included.
@param roi Extracted submatrix specified as a rectangle.
@param ranges Array of selected ranges along each array dimension.
@param ranges Array of selected ranges along each array dimension.
To select all the columns, use Range::all().



### 元素类型转换

```cpp
    template<typename _Tp> operator std::vector<_Tp>() const;
    template<typename _Tp, int n> operator Vec<_Tp, n>() const;
    template<typename _Tp, int m, int n> operator Matx<_Tp, m, n>() const;    
    template<typename _Tp, std::size_t _Nm> operator std::array<_Tp, _Nm>() const;
```



### isContinuous

`bool isContinuous() const;`
​     @brief Reports whether the matrix is continuous or not.   

​    The method returns true if the matrix elements are stored continuously without gaps at the end of    each row. Otherwise, it returns false. Obviously, 1x1 or 1xN matrices are always continuous.    Matrices created with Mat::create are always continuous. But if you extract a part of the matrix using Mat::col, Mat::diag, and so on, or constructed a matrix header for externally allocated data, such matrices may no longer have this property.

The continuity flag is stored as a bit in the Mat::flags field and is computed automatically when you construct a matrix header. Thus, the continuity check is a very fast operation, though theoretically it could be done as follows:
```cpp
​    // alternative implementation of Mat::isContinuous()
​    bool myCheckMatContinuity(const Mat& m)
​    {
​        //return (m.flags & Mat::CONTINUOUS_FLAG) != 0;
​        return m.rows == 1 || m.step == m.cols*m.elemSize();
​    }
```
The method is used in quite a few of OpenCV functions. The point is that element-wise operations (such as arithmetic and logical operations, math functions, alpha blending, color space transformations, and others) do not depend on the image geometry. Thus, if all the input and output arrays are continuous, the functions can process them as very long single-row vectors. The example below illustrates how an alpha-blending function can be implemented:
```cpp
​    template<typename T>
​    void alphaBlendRGBA(const Mat& src1, const Mat& src2, Mat& dst)
​    {
​        const float alpha_scale = (float)std::numeric_limits<T>::max(),
​                    inv_scale = 1.f/alpha_scale;

​        CV_Assert( src1.type() == src2.type() &&
​                   src1.type() == CV_MAKETYPE(traits::Depth<T>::value, 4) &&
​                   src1.size() == src2.size());
​        Size size = src1.size();
​        dst.create(size, src1.type());

​        // here is the idiom: check the arrays for continuity and,
​        // if this is the case,
​        // treat the arrays as 1D vectors
​        if( src1.isContinuous() && src2.isContinuous() && dst.isContinuous() )
​        {
​            size.width *= size.height;
​            size.height = 1;
​        }
​        size.width *= 4;

​        for( int i = 0; i < size.height; i++ )
​        {
​            // when the arrays are continuous,
​            // the outer loop is executed only once
​            const T* ptr1 = src1.ptr<T>(i);
​            const T* ptr2 = src2.ptr<T>(i);
​            T* dptr = dst.ptr<T>(i);

​            for( int j = 0; j < size.width; j += 4 )
​            {
​                float alpha = ptr1[j+3]*inv_scale, beta = ptr2[j+3]*inv_scale;
​                dptr[j] = saturate_cast<T>(ptr1[j]*alpha + ptr2[j]*beta);
​                dptr[j+1] = saturate_cast<T>(ptr1[j+1]*alpha + ptr2[j+1]*beta);
​                dptr[j+2] = saturate_cast<T>(ptr1[j+2]*alpha + ptr2[j+2]*beta);
​                dptr[j+3] = saturate_cast<T>((1 - (1-alpha)*(1-beta))*alpha_scale);
​            }
​        }
​    }
```
This approach, while being very simple, can boost the performance of a simple element-operation by 10-20 percents, especially if the image is rather small and the operation is quite simple.

Another OpenCV idiom in this function, a call of Mat::create for the destination array, that allocates the destination array unless it already has the proper size and type. And while the newly allocated arrays are always continuous, you still need to check the destination array because Mat::create does not always allocate a new matrix.

###  isSubmatrix

`bool isSubmatrix() const;`
​    returns true if the matrix is a submatrix of another matrix
​    

### elemSize

`size_t elemSize() const;`
​    @brief Returns the matrix element size in bytes.    

​    The method returns the matrix element size in bytes. For example, if the matrix type is CV_16SC3 ,  the method returns 3\*sizeof(short) or 6.
​    

`size_t elemSize1() const;`
​    @brief Returns the size of each matrix element channel in bytes.    

   The method returns the matrix element channel size in bytes, that is, it ignores the number of     channels. For example, if the matrix type is CV_16SC3 , the method returns sizeof(short) or 2.
​   

### type

`int type() const;`    

​    @brief Returns the type of a matrix element.    
​    The method returns a matrix element type. This is an identifier compatible with the CvMat type
​    system, like CV_16SC3 or 16-bit signed 3-channel array, and so on.
​    

### depth

`int depth() const;    `
​     @brief Returns the depth of a matrix element.
​        The method returns the identifier of the matrix element depth (the type of each individual channel).    For example, for a 16-bit signed element array, the method returns CV_16S . A complete list of   matrix types contains the following values:
​    -   CV_8U - 8-bit unsigned integers ( 0..255 )
​    -   CV_8S - 8-bit signed integers ( -128..127 )
​    -   CV_16U - 16-bit unsigned integers ( 0..65535 )
​    -   CV_16S - 16-bit signed integers ( -32768..32767 )
​    -   CV_32S - 32-bit signed integers ( -2147483648..2147483647 )
​    -   CV_32F - 32-bit floating-point numbers ( -FLT_MAX..FLT_MAX, INF, NAN )
​    -   CV_64F - 64-bit floating-point numbers ( -DBL_MAX..DBL_MAX, INF, NAN )

​     

### channels

 `int channels() const;     `
   The method returns the number of matrix channels.
​    

### step1

`size_t step1(int i=0) const;    `
​     @brief Returns a normalized step.    

​    The method returns a matrix step divided by Mat::elemSize1() . It can be useful to quickly access an    arbitrary matrix element.
​   

### empty

`bool empty() const;    `
​    @brief Returns true if the array has no elements.    

​    The method returns true if Mat::total() is 0 or if Mat::data is NULL. Because of pop_back() and    resize() methods `M.total() == 0` does not imply that `M.data == NULL`.
​     

### total

`size_t total() const;`    

​    @brief Returns the total number of array elements.    

​    The method returns the number of array elements (a number of pixels if the array represents an     image).
​    

`size_t total(int startDim, int endDim=INT_MAX) const;     `
​     @brief Returns the total number of array elements.    

​     The method returns the number of elements within a certain sub-array slice with startDim <= dim < endDim



### checkVector

`int checkVector(int elemChannels, int depth=-1, bool requireContinuous=true) const;`

@param `elemChannels` Number of channels or number of columns the matrix should have.

For a 2-D matrix, when the matrix has only 1 column, then it should have elemChannels channels; When the matrix has only 1 channel, then it should have elemChannels columns.
For a 3-D matrix, it should have only one channel. Furthermore, if the number of planes is not one, then the number of rows within every plane has to be 1; if the number of rows within every plane is not 1, then the number of planes has to be 1.

@param depth The depth the matrix should have. Set it to -1 when any depth is fine.

@param requireContinuous Set it to true to require the matrix to be continuous

@return -1 if the requirement is not satisfied.

Otherwise, it returns the number of elements in the matrix. Note that an element may have multiple channels.

The following code demonstrates its usage for a 2-d matrix:

@snippet snippets/core_mat_checkVector.cpp example-2d 

The following code demonstrates its usage for a 3-d matrix:

@snippet snippets/core_mat_checkVector.cpp example-3d



### ptr


```cpp
uchar* ptr(int i0=0);
const uchar* ptr(int i0=0) const;
uchar* ptr(int row, int col);
const uchar* ptr(int row, int col) const;
uchar* ptr(int i0, int i1, int i2);
const uchar* ptr(int i0, int i1, int i2) const;
uchar* ptr(const int* idx);
const uchar* ptr(const int* idx) const;
template<int n> uchar* ptr(const Vec<int, n>& idx);
template<int n> const uchar* ptr(const Vec<int, n>& idx) const;
template<typename _Tp> _Tp* ptr(int i0=0);
template<typename _Tp> const _Tp* ptr(int i0=0) const;
template<typename _Tp> _Tp* ptr(int row, int col);
template<typename _Tp> const _Tp* ptr(int row, int col) const;
template<typename _Tp> _Tp* ptr(int i0, int i1, int i2);
ptr(int i0, int i1, int i2) const;
template<typename _Tp> _Tp* ptr(const int* idx);
template<typename _Tp> const _Tp* ptr(const int* idx) const;
template<typename _Tp, int n> _Tp* ptr(const Vec<int, n>& idx);
template<typename _Tp, int n> const _Tp* ptr(const Vec<int, n>& idx) const;
```

@brief Returns a pointer to the specified matrix row.

The methods return `uchar*` or typed pointer to the specified matrix row. See the sample in
Mat::isContinuous to know how to use these methods.
@param` i0` A 0-based row index.
@param row Index along the dimension 0
@param col Index along the dimension 1

### at


```cpp
template<typename _Tp> _Tp& at(int i0=0);
template<typename _Tp> const _Tp& at(int i0=0) const;
template<typename _Tp> _Tp& at(int row, int col);
template<typename _Tp> const _Tp& at(int row, int col) const;
template<typename _Tp> _Tp& at(int i0, int i1, int i2);
template<typename _Tp> const _Tp& at(int i0, int i1, int i2) const;
template<typename _Tp> _Tp& at(const int* idx);
template<typename _Tp> const _Tp& at(const int* idx) const;
template<typename _Tp, int n> _Tp& at(const Vec<int, n>& idx);
template<typename _Tp> _Tp& at(Point pt);
		//special versions for 2D arrays (especially convenient for referencing image pixels)
template<typename _Tp> const _Tp& at(Point pt) const;
		//special versions for 2D arrays (especially convenient for referencing image pixels)
template<typename _Tp, int n> const _Tp& at(const Vec<int, n>& idx) const;
```

@param i0 Index along the dimension 0

@param row Index along the dimension 0
@param col Index along the dimension 1
@param i0 Index along the dimension 0
@param i1 Index along the dimension 1
@param i2 Index along the dimension 2
@param idx Array of Mat::dims indices.
@param pt Element position specified as Point(j,i) .
special versions for 2D arrays (especially convenient for referencing image pixels)

@brief Returns a reference to the specified array element.

The template methods return a reference to the specified array element. For the sake of higher
performance, the index range checks are only performed in the Debug configuration.

Note that the variants with a single index (i) can be used to access elements of single-row or
single-column 2-dimensional arrays. That is, if, for example, A is a 1 x N floating-point matrix and
B is an M x 1 integer matrix, you can simply write `A.at<float>(k+4)` and `B.at<int>(2*i+1)`
instead of `A.at<float>(0,k+4)` and `B.at<int>(2*i+1,0)`, respectively.

The example below initializes a Hilbert matrix:
```cpp
​    Mat H(100, 100, CV_64F);
​    for(int i = 0; i < H.rows; i++)
​        for(int j = 0; j < H.cols; j++)
​            H.at<double>(i,j)=1./(i+j+1);

```

Keep in mind that the size identifier used in the at operator cannot be chosen at random. It depends
on the image from which you are trying to retrieve the data. The table below gives a better insight in this:

 - If matrix is of type `CV_8U` then use `Mat.at<uchar>(y,x)`.
 - If matrix is of type `CV_8S` then use `Mat.at<schar>(y,x)`.
 - If matrix is of type `CV_16U` then use `Mat.at<ushort>(y,x)`.
 - If matrix is of type `CV_16S` then use `Mat.at<short>(y,x)`.
 - If matrix is of type `CV_32S`  then use `Mat.at<int>(y,x)`.
 - If matrix is of type `CV_32F`  then use `Mat.at<float>(y,x)`.
 - If matrix is of type `CV_64F` then use `Mat.at<double>(y,x)`.



### begin

template<typename _Tp> MatIterator_<_Tp> begin();
template<typename _Tp> MatConstIterator_<_Tp> begin() const;

@brief Returns the matrix iterator and sets it to the first matrix element.

The methods return the matrix read-only or read-write iterators. The use of matrix iterators is very
similar to the use of bi-directional STL iterators. In the example below, the alpha blending
function is rewritten using the matrix iterators:
```cpp
​    template<typename T>
​    void alphaBlendRGBA(const Mat& src1, const Mat& src2, Mat& dst)
​    {
​        typedef Vec<T, 4> VT;

​        const float alpha_scale = (float)std::numeric_limits<T>::max(),
​                    inv_scale = 1.f/alpha_scale;

​        CV_Assert( src1.type() == src2.type() &&
​                   src1.type() == traits::Type<VT>::value &&
​                   src1.size() == src2.size());
​        Size size = src1.size();
​        dst.create(size, src1.type());

​        MatConstIterator_<VT> it1 = src1.begin<VT>(), it1_end = src1.end<VT>();
​        MatConstIterator_<VT> it2 = src2.begin<VT>();
​        MatIterator_<VT> dst_it = dst.begin<VT>();

​        for( ; it1 != it1_end; ++it1, ++it2, ++dst_it )
​        {
​            VT pix1 = *it1, pix2 = *it2;
​            float alpha = pix1[3]*inv_scale, beta = pix2[3]*inv_scale;
​            *dst_it = VT(saturate_cast<T>(pix1[0]*alpha + pix2[0]*beta),
​                         saturate_cast<T>(pix1[1]*alpha + pix2[1]*beta),
​                         saturate_cast<T>(pix1[2]*alpha + pix2[2]*beta),
​                         saturate_cast<T>((1 - (1-alpha)*(1-beta))*alpha_scale));
​        }
​    }
```



### end

template<typename _Tp> MatIterator_<_Tp> end();
template<typename _Tp> MatConstIterator_<_Tp> end() const;
@brief Returns the matrix iterator and sets it to the after-last matrix element.

The methods return the matrix read-only or read-write iterators, set to the point following the last
matrix element.

template<typename _Tp, typename Functor> void forEach(const Functor& operation);
template<typename _Tp, typename Functor> void forEach(const Functor& operation) const;

@brief Runs the given functor over all matrix elements in parallel.
The operation passed as argument has to be a function pointer, a function object or a lambda(C++11).
Example 1. All of the operations below put 0xFF the first channel of all matrix elements:
```cpp
​    Mat image(1920, 1080, CV_8UC3);
​    typedef cv::Point3_<uint8_t> Pixel;

​    // first. raw pointer access.
​    for (int r = 0; r < image.rows; ++r) {
​        Pixel* ptr = image.ptr<Pixel>(r, 0);
​        const Pixel* ptr_end = ptr + image.cols;
​        for (; ptr != ptr_end; ++ptr) {
​            ptr->x = 255;
​        }
​    }

​    // Using MatIterator. (Simple but there are a Iterator's overhead)
​    for (Pixel &p : cv::Mat_<Pixel>(image)) {
​        p.x = 255;
​    }

​    // Parallel execution with function object.
​    struct Operator {
​        void operator ()(Pixel &pixel, const int * position) {
​            pixel.x = 255;
​        }
​    };
​    image.forEach<Pixel>(Operator());

​    // Parallel execution using C++11 lambda.
​    image.forEach<Pixel>([](Pixel &p, const int * position) -> void {
​        p.x = 255;
​    });
```
Example 2. Using the pixel's position:
```cpp
    // Creating 3D matrix (255 x 255 x 255) typed uint8_t
    // and initialize all elements by the value which equals elements position.
    // i.e. pixels (x,y,z) = (1,2,3) is (b,g,r) = (1,2,3).

    int sizes[] = { 255, 255, 255 };
    typedef cv::Point3_<uint8_t> Pixel;

    Mat_<Pixel> image = Mat::zeros(3, sizes, CV_8UC3);

    image.forEach<Pixel>([&](Pixel& pixel, const int position[]) -> void {
        pixel.x = position[0];
        pixel.y = position[1];
        pixel.z = position[2];
    });
```









### 赋值    =
```cpp
Mat& operator = (Mat&& m);
Mat& operator = (const Mat& m);
```
​    These are available assignment operators. Since they all are very different, make sure to read the  operator parameters description.
​    @param m Assigned, right-hand-side matrix. Matrix assignment is an O(1) operation. This means that no data is copied but the data is shared and the reference counter, if any, is incremented. Before  assigning new data, the old data is de-referenced via Mat::release .
​    
```cpp
Mat& operator = (const MatExpr& expr);   
```
​    @param expr Assigned matrix expression object. As opposite to the first form of the assignment    operation, the second form can reuse already allocated matrix if it has the right size and type to   fit the matrix expression result. It is automatically handled by the real function that the matrix   expressions is expanded to. For example, C=A+B is expanded to add(A, B, C), and add takes care of   automatic C reallocation.
​ 

`Mat& operator = (const Scalar& s);`
​    @brief Sets all or some of the array elements to the specified value.
​    @param s Assigned scalar converted to the actual array type.

### row

`Mat row(int y) const;`
 @brief Creates a matrix header for the specified matrix row.

The method makes a new header for the specified matrix row and returns it. This is an O(1) operation, regardless of the matrix size. The underlying data of the new matrix is shared with the original matrix. Here is the example of one of the classical basic matrix processing operations,  axpy, used by LU and many other algorithms:
   ```cpp
        inline void matrix_axpy(Mat& A, int i, int j, double alpha)
        {
            A.row(i) += A.row(j)*alpha;
        }
   ```
@note In the current implementation, the following code does not work as expected:
```cpp
    Mat A;
    ...
    A.row(i) = A.row(j); // will not work
```
This happens because A.row(i) forms a temporary header that is further assigned to another header. Remember that each of these operations is O(1), that is, no data is copied. Thus, the above assignment is not true if you may have expected the j-th row to be copied to the i-th row. To achieve that, you should either turn this simple assignment into an expression or use the Mat::copyTo method:

   ```cpp
        Mat A;
        ...
        // works, but looks a bit obscure.
        A.row(i) = A.row(j) + 0;
        // this is a bit longer, but the recommended method.
        A.row(j).copyTo(A.row(i));
   ```
 @param y A 0-based row index.



### col

`Mat col(int x) const;`
​    @brief Creates a matrix header for the specified matrix column.

The method makes a new header for the specified matrix column and returns it. This is an O(1) operation, regardless of the matrix size. The underlying data of the new matrix is shared with the original matrix. See also the Mat::row description.
@param x A 0-based column index.

​    

### `rowRange`

`Mat rowRange(int startrow, int endrow) const;`
​     @brief Creates a matrix header for the specified row span.
​    The method makes a new header for the specified row span of the matrix. Similarly to Mat::row and    Mat::col , this is an O(1) operation.
​    @param startrow An inclusive 0-based start index of the row span.
​    @param endrow An exclusive 0-based ending index of the row span.

`Mat rowRange(const Range& r) const;`
​    @param r Range structure containing both the start and the end indices.

### colRange

`Mat colRange(int startcol, int endcol) const;`
​    @brief Creates a matrix header for the specified column span.
​    The method makes a new header for the specified column span of the matrix. Similarly to Mat::row and    Mat::col , this is an O(1) operation.
​    @param startcol An inclusive 0-based start index of the column span.
​    @param endcol An exclusive 0-based ending index of the column span.​    

`Mat colRange(const Range& r) const;   `

​    @param r Range structure containing both the start and the end indices.

### diag

`Mat diag(int d=0) const;`
​    @brief Extracts a diagonal from a matrix
​    The method makes a new header for the specified matrix diagonal. The new matrix is represented as a  single-column matrix. Similarly to Mat::row and Mat::col, this is an O(1) operation.
​    @param d index of the diagonal, with the following values:
​    - `d=0` is the main diagonal.
​    - `d<0` is a diagonal from the lower half. For example, d=-1 means the diagonal is set    immediately below the main one.
​    - `d>0` is a diagonal from the upper half. For example, d=1 means the diagonal is set    immediately above the main one.
​    For example:

```cpp
        Mat m = (Mat_<int>(3,3) <<
                    1,2,3,
                    4,5,6,
                    7,8,9);
        Mat d0 = m.diag(0);
        Mat d1 = m.diag(1);
        Mat d_1 = m.diag(-1);
```
​    The resulting matrices are
```cpp
     d0 =
       [1;
        5;
        9]
     d1 =
       [2;
        6]
     d_1 =
       [4;
        8]
```
​     

`static Mat diag(const Mat& d);`
​     @brief creates a diagonal matrix
​    The method creates a square diagonal matrix from specified main diagonal.
​    @param d One-dimensional matrix that represents the main diagonal.
​     

###  clone

`Mat clone() const CV_NODISCARD;`
​     @brief Creates a full copy of the array and the underlying data.
​    The method creates a full copy of the array. The original step[] is not taken into account. So, the  array copy is a continuous array occupying total()*elemSize() bytes.
​    

### copyTo

`void copyTo( OutputArray m ) const;`
​    @brief Copies the matrix to another one.

The method copies the matrix data to another matrix. Before copying the data, the method invokes :
```cpp
    m.create(this->size(), this->type());
```
so that the destination matrix is reallocated if needed. While m.copyTo(m); works flawlessly, the function does not handle the case of a partial overlap between the source and the destination matrices.

When the operation mask is specified, if the Mat::create call shown above reallocates the matrix, the newly allocated matrix is initialized with all zeros before copying the data.
@param m Destination matrix. If it does not have a proper size or type before the operation, it is reallocated.



`void copyTo( OutputArray m, InputArray mask ) const;`
​    @param m Destination matrix. If it does not have a proper size or type before the operation, it is    reallocated.
​    @param mask Operation mask of the same size as \*this. Its non-zero elements indicate which matrix    elements need to be copied. The mask has to be of type CV_8U and can have 1 or multiple channels.
​    

### `convertTo`

`void convertTo( OutputArray m, int rtype, double alpha=1, double beta=0 ) const;`
​    @brief Converts an array to another data type with optional scaling.
​    The method converts source pixel values to the target data type. saturate_cast\<\> is applied at   the end to avoid possible overflows:

$[m(x,y) = saturate\_ cast<rType>( \alpha (*this)(x,y) +  \beta )]$
@param m output matrix; if it does not have a proper size or type before the operation, it is
reallocated.
@param rtype desired output matrix type or, rather, the depth since the number of channels are the
same as the input has; if rtype is negative, the output matrix will have the same type as the input.
@param alpha optional scale factor.
@param beta optional delta added to the scaled values.

### assignTo

`void assignTo( Mat& m, int type=-1 ) const;`
​    @brief Provides a functional form of convertTo.
​    This is an internally used method called by the @ref MatrixExpressions engine.
​    @param m Destination array.
​    @param type Desired destination array depth (or -1 if it should be the same as the source type).
​    

### setTo

`Mat& setTo(InputArray value, InputArray mask=noArray());`
​    @brief Sets all or some of the array elements to the specified value.
​    This is an advanced variant of the Mat::operator=(const Scalar& s) operator.
​    @param value Assigned scalar converted to the actual array type.
​    @param mask Operation mask of the same size as \*this. Its non-zero elements indicate which matrix elements need to be copied. The mask has to be of type CV_8U and can have 1 or multiple channels
​    

### reshape
```cpp
Mat reshape(int cn, int rows=0) const;
Mat reshape(int cn, int newndims, const int* newsz) const;
Mat reshape(int cn, const std::vector<int>& newshape) const;
```

   @brief Changes the shape and/or the number of channels of a 2D matrix without copying the data.
​    The method makes a new matrix header for \*this elements. The new matrix may have a different size  and/or different number of channels. Any combination is possible if:
​    -   No extra elements are included into the new matrix and no elements are excluded. Consequently,
​        the product rows\*cols\*channels() must stay the same after the transformation.
​    -   No data is copied. That is, this is an O(1) operation. Consequently, if you change the number of  rows, or the operation changes the indices of elements row in some other way, the matrix must be continuous. See Mat::isContinuous .

For example, if there is a set of 3D points stored as an STL vector, and you want to represent the points as a 3xN matrix, do the following:

```cpp
    std::vector<Point3f> vec;
    ...
    Mat pointMat = Mat(vec). // convert vector to Mat, O(1) operation
                      reshape(1). // make Nx3 1-channel matrix out of Nx1 3-channel.
                                  // Also, an O(1) operation
                         t(); // finally, transpose the Nx3 matrix.
                              // This involves copying all the elements
```
@param cn New number of channels. If the parameter is 0, the number of channels remains the same.
@param rows New number of rows. If the parameter is 0, the number of rows remains the same.

  

### Transposes 

`MatExpr t() const;`

   @brief Transposes a matrix.

​    The method performs matrix transposition by means of matrix expressions. It does not perform the    actual transposition but returns a temporary matrix transposition object that can be further used as   a part of more complex matrix expressions or can be assigned to a matrix:

```cpp

        Mat A1 = A + Mat::eye(A.size(), A.type())*lambda;
        Mat C = A1.t()*A1; // compute (A + lambda*I)^t * (A + lamda*I)

```

​    

### Inverses 

`MatExpr inv(int method=DECOMP_LU) const;`

@brief Inverses a matrix.

​    The method performs a matrix inversion by means of matrix expressions. This means that a temporary    matrix inversion object is returned by the method and can be used further as a part of more complex    matrix expressions or can be assigned to a matrix.

​    @param method Matrix inversion method. One of cv::DecompTypes

### mul

`MatExpr mul(InputArray m, double scale=1) const;`

​     @brief Performs an element-wise multiplication or division of the two matrices.

​    The method returns a temporary object encoding per-element array multiplication, with optional    scale. Note that this is not a matrix multiplication that corresponds to a simpler "\*" operator.

​    Example:

  

```
Mat C = A.mul(5/B); // equivalent to divide(A, B, C, 5)
```

​     @param m Another array of the same type and the same size as \*this, or a matrix expression.

​    @param scale Optional scale factor.

​    

### cross

`Mat cross(InputArray m) const;  `

   @brief Computes a cross-product of two 3-element vectors.

​    The method computes a cross-product of two 3-element vectors. The vectors must be 3-element  floating-point vectors of the same shape and size. The result is another 3-element vector of the same shape and type as operands.

​    @param m Another cross-product operand.

   

### dot

double dot(InputArray m) const;

​    @brief Computes a dot-product of two vectors.

​    The method computes a dot-product of two matrices. If the matrices are not single-column or single-row vectors, the top-to-bottom left-to-right scan ordering is used to treat them as 1D vectors. The vectors must have the same size and type. If the matrices have more than one channel, the dot products from all the channels are summed together.

​    @param m another dot-product operand.



### internal use function

`void deallocate();`
//! internal use function, consider to use 'release' method instead; deallocates the matrix data
​    
`void copySize(const Mat& m);`
​    //! internal use function; properly re-allocates _size, _step arrays



   


## 矩阵表达式  MatExpr

>  @brief Matrix expression representation

This is a list of implemented matrix operations that can be combined in arbitrary complex expressions (here A, B stand for matrices ( Mat ), s for a scalar ( Scalar ), alpha for a real-valued scalar ( double )):

-   Addition, subtraction, negation: `A+B`, `A-B`, `A+s`, `A-s`, `s+A`, `s-A`, `-A`
-   Scaling: `A*alpha`
-   Per-element multiplication and division: `A.mul(B)`, `A/B`, `alpha/A`
-   Matrix multiplication: `A*B`
-   Transposition: `A.t()` (means A<sup>T</sup>)
-   Matrix inversion and pseudo-inversion, solving linear systems and least-squares problems:
    `A.inv([method]) (~ A<sup>-1</sup>)`,   `A.inv([method])*B (~ X: AX=B)`
-   Comparison: `A cmpop B`, `A cmpop alpha`, `alpha cmpop A`, where *cmpop* is one of `>`, `>=`, `==`, `!=`, `<=`, `<`. The result of comparison is an 8-bit single channel mask whose elements are set to 255 (if the particular element or pair of elements satisfy the condition) or 0.
-   Bitwise logical operations: `A logicop B`, `A logicop s`, `s logicop A`, `~A`, where *logicop* is one of
    `&`, `|`, `^`.
-   Element-wise minimum and maximum: `min(A, B)`, `min(A, alpha)`, `max(A, B)`, `max(A, alpha)`
-   Element-wise absolute value: `abs(A)`
-   Cross-product, dot-product: `A.cross(B)`, `A.dot(B)`
-   Any function of matrix or matrices and scalars that returns a matrix or a scalar, such as norm, mean, sum, countNonZero, trace, determinant, repeat, and others.
-   Matrix initializers ( Mat::eye(), Mat::zeros(), Mat::ones() ), matrix comma-separated initializers, matrix constructors and operators that extract sub-matrices (see Mat description).
-   Mat_<destination_type>() constructors to cast the result to the proper type.
> @note Comma-separated initializers and probably some other operations may require additional
explicit Mat() or Mat_<T>() constructor calls to resolve a possible ambiguity.

Here are examples of matrix expressions:
```cpp
    // compute pseudo-inverse of A, equivalent to A.inv(DECOMP_SVD)
    SVD svd(A);
    Mat pinvA = svd.vt.t()*Mat::diag(1./svd.w)*svd.u.t();

    // compute the new vector of parameters in the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm
    x -= (A.t()*A + lambda*Mat::eye(A.cols,A.cols,A.type())).inv(DECOMP_CHOLESKY)*(A.t()*err);
    
    // sharpen image using "unsharp mask" algorithm
    Mat blurred; double sigma = 1, threshold = 5, amount = 1;
    GaussianBlur(img, blurred, Size(), sigma, sigma);
    Mat lowContrastMask = abs(img - blurred) < threshold;
    Mat sharpened = img*(1+amount) + blurred*(-amount);
    img.copyTo(sharpened, lowContrastMask);
```

源码

```cpp
class CV_EXPORTS MatExpr
{
public:
    MatExpr();
    explicit MatExpr(const Mat& m);

    MatExpr(const MatOp* _op, int _flags, const Mat& _a = Mat(), const Mat& _b = Mat(),
            const Mat& _c = Mat(), double _alpha = 1, double _beta = 1, const Scalar& _s = Scalar());
    
    operator Mat() const;
    template<typename _Tp> operator Mat_<_Tp>() const;
    
    Size size() const;
    int type() const;
    
    MatExpr row(int y) const;
    MatExpr col(int x) const;
    MatExpr diag(int d = 0) const;
    MatExpr operator()( const Range& rowRange, const Range& colRange ) const;
    MatExpr operator()( const Rect& roi ) const;
    
    MatExpr t() const;
    MatExpr inv(int method = DECOMP_LU) const;
    MatExpr mul(const MatExpr& e, double scale=1) const;
    MatExpr mul(const Mat& m, double scale=1) const;
    
    Mat cross(const Mat& m) const;
    double dot(const Mat& m) const;
    
    const MatOp* op;
    int flags;
    
    Mat a, b, c;
    double alpha, beta;
    Scalar s;
};
```



### OpenCV两个Mat相减的隐藏秘密

2018年06月09日 00:06:20 [天律界中子](https://me.csdn.net/u012494876) 阅读数：1979



 版权声明：本文为博主原创文章，未经博主允许不得转载。	https://blog.csdn.net/u012494876/article/details/80629474

##### 起因

今天在看同事写的代码时，发现一个“错误”： 
他的原意是实现以下功能：

```cpp
cv::Mat absDiff;
cv::absdiff(mat1, mat2, absDiff);12
```

其中`mat1`和`mat2`均为`CV_8UC1`类型。

但是可能是一时没想起这个函数，于是他写成了这个样子：

```cpp
cv::Mat absDiff = cv::abs(mat1 - mat2);1
```

##### 问题

于是我认真地告诉他，这样做是错的。假设`mat1`为`[0]`，`mat2`为`[255]`，那么`mat1 - mat2`将会得到`[0]`，因为`cv::saturate_cast<uchar>(0 - 255) == 0`。则`cv::abs([0])`自然就是`[0]`，而他的期望是得到`[255]`。

并且我写出如下代码证明他是错的：

```cpp
cv::Mat diff = mat1 - mat;1
```

结果`diff`确实是`[0]`。那么`cv::Mat absDiff = cv::abs(diff);`肯定就是`[0]`了。

但是他坚持让我用`cv::Mat absDiff = cv::abs(mat1 - mat2);`测试。结果。。。。`absDiff`竟然真的是`[255]`！我当时就震惊了，同时隐隐有一种感觉：这其中一定隐藏着一个天大的秘密。

##### 秘密

于是我进入调试模式，认真观察每一步，终于明白了玄机所在。

##### 为什么我得到了`[0]`

先来分析我的测试代码：

```cpp
cv::Mat diff = mat1 - mat;1
```

在我以前的观念里，`mat1 - mat`是两个`cv::Mat`互相作用，实际上调用的是`cv::subtract()`。但是事实上，`mat1 - mat2`调用的是以下函数：

```cpp
CV_EXPORTS MatExpr operator - (const Mat& a, const Mat& b);

MatExpr operator - (const Mat& a, const Mat& b)
{
    MatExpr e;
    MatOp_AddEx::makeExpr(e, a, b, 1, -1);
    return e;
}12345678
```

可以看到，`mat1 - mat2`实际上是生成了一个`MatExpr`对象。在生成过程中，并没有进行实际的相减操作，而只是保存了`a`和`b`，并记录了它们之间期望进行的操作：相减。实际的相减操作是在类型转换时进行的：

```cpp
//cv::Mat diff = mat1 - mat; // 在这里调用了operator Mat()

MatExpr::operator Mat() const
{
    Mat m;
    op->assign(*this, m);
    return m;
}12345678
```

在`assign`中最终调用了`cv::subtract()`。所以`mat1 - mat2`得到了`[0]`。

##### 为什么同事得到了`[255]`

再来分析我同事的测试代码：

```cpp
cv::Mat absDiff = cv::abs(mat1 - mat2);1
```

从上面我们知道，`mat1 - mat2`生成了一个`MatExpr`对象。而`cv::abs()`调用的是

```CPP
MatExpr abs(const MatExpr& e)
{
    CV_INSTRUMENT_REGION()

    MatExpr en;
    e.op->abs(e, en);
    return en;
}12345678
```

这个函数再次生成了一个`MatExpr`对象，其中记录了操作对象`e`和期望进行的操作：取绝对值，而并没有进行实际的运算。然后同上面一样，它是在赋值给`absDiff`时调用`operator Mat()`进行运算的。神奇的地方来了，它把前面的相减操作与这里的取绝对值操作组合到了一起(而不是依次运算)，最终调用的正是`cv::absdiff()`！

于是谜底揭开了，一切的原因都是因为`MatExpr`这个中间对象实现了延迟运算和操作组合。

##### 感叹

我还是太年轻！



## `Mat_`

@brief Template matrix class derived from Mat

```cpp
    template<typename _Tp> class Mat_ : public Mat
    {
    public:
        // ... some specific methods
        //         and
        // no new extra fields
    };
```
The class `Mat_<_Tp>` is a *thin* template wrapper on top of the Mat class. It does not have any extra data fields. Nor this class nor Mat has any virtual methods. Thus, references or pointers to these two classes can be freely but carefully converted one to another. For example:
```cpp
​    // create a 100x100 8-bit matrix
​    Mat M(100,100,CV_8U);
​    // this will be compiled fine. no any data conversion will be done.
​    Mat_<float>& M1 = (Mat_<float>&)M;
​    // the program is likely to crash at the statement below
​    M1(99,99) = 1.f;
```
While Mat is sufficient in most cases, Mat_ can be more convenient if you use a lot of element access operations and if you know matrix type at the compilation time. Note that `Mat::at(int y,int x)` and `Mat_::operator()(int y,int x)` do absolutely the same and run at the same speed, but the latter is certainly shorter:
```cpp
​    Mat_<double> M(20,20);
​    for(int i = 0; i < M.rows; i++)
​        for(int j = 0; j < M.cols; j++)
​            M(i,j) = 1./(i+j+1);
​    Mat E, V;
​    eigen(M,E,V);
​    cout << E.at<double>(0,0)/E.at<double>(M.rows-1,0);
```
To use Mat_ for multi-channel images/matrices, pass Vec as a Mat_ parameter:
```cpp
​    // allocate a 320x240 color image and fill it with green (in RGB space)
​    Mat_<Vec3b> img(240, 320, Vec3b(0,255,0));
​    // now draw a diagonal white line
​    for(int i = 0; i < 100; i++)
​        img(i,i)=Vec3b(255,255,255);
​    // and now scramble the 2nd (red) channel of each pixel
​    for(int i = 0; i < img.rows; i++)
​        for(int j = 0; j < img.cols; j++)
​            img(i,j)[2] ^= (uchar)(i ^ j);
```
Mat_ is fully compatible with C++11 range-based for loop. For example such loop can be used to safely apply look-up table:
```cpp
void applyTable(Mat_<uchar>& I, const uchar* const table)
{
    for(auto& pixel : I)
    {
        pixel = table[pixel];
    }
}
```

源码

```cpp

template<typename _Tp> class Mat_ : public Mat
{
public:
    typedef _Tp value_type;
    typedef typename DataType<_Tp>::channel_type channel_type;
    typedef MatIterator_<_Tp> iterator;
    typedef MatConstIterator_<_Tp> const_iterator;

    //! default constructor
    Mat_();
    //! equivalent to Mat(_rows, _cols, DataType<_Tp>::type)
    Mat_(int _rows, int _cols);
    //! constructor that sets each matrix element to specified value
    Mat_(int _rows, int _cols, const _Tp& value);
    //! equivalent to Mat(_size, DataType<_Tp>::type)
    explicit Mat_(Size _size);
    //! constructor that sets each matrix element to specified value
    Mat_(Size _size, const _Tp& value);
    //! n-dim array constructor
    Mat_(int _ndims, const int* _sizes);
    //! n-dim array constructor that sets each matrix element to specified value
    Mat_(int _ndims, const int* _sizes, const _Tp& value);
    //! copy/conversion constructor. If m is of different type, it's converted
    Mat_(const Mat& m);
    //! copy constructor
    Mat_(const Mat_& m);
    //! constructs a matrix on top of user-allocated data. step is in bytes(!!!), regardless of the type
    Mat_(int _rows, int _cols, _Tp* _data, size_t _step=AUTO_STEP);
    //! constructs n-dim matrix on top of user-allocated data. steps are in bytes(!!!), regardless of the type
    Mat_(int _ndims, const int* _sizes, _Tp* _data, const size_t* _steps=0);
    //! selects a submatrix
    Mat_(const Mat_& m, const Range& rowRange, const Range& colRange=Range::all());
    //! selects a submatrix
    Mat_(const Mat_& m, const Rect& roi);
    //! selects a submatrix, n-dim version
    Mat_(const Mat_& m, const Range* ranges);
    //! selects a submatrix, n-dim version
    Mat_(const Mat_& m, const std::vector<Range>& ranges);
    //! from a matrix expression
    explicit Mat_(const MatExpr& e);
    //! makes a matrix out of Vec, std::vector, Point_ or Point3_. The matrix will have a single column
    explicit Mat_(const std::vector<_Tp>& vec, bool copyData=false);
    template<int n> explicit Mat_(const Vec<typename DataType<_Tp>::channel_type, n>& vec, bool copyData=true);
    template<int m, int n> explicit Mat_(const Matx<typename DataType<_Tp>::channel_type, m, n>& mtx, bool copyData=true);
    explicit Mat_(const Point_<typename DataType<_Tp>::channel_type>& pt, bool copyData=true);
    explicit Mat_(const Point3_<typename DataType<_Tp>::channel_type>& pt, bool copyData=true);
    explicit Mat_(const MatCommaInitializer_<_Tp>& commaInitializer);

    Mat_(std::initializer_list<_Tp> values);
    explicit Mat_(const std::initializer_list<int> sizes, const std::initializer_list<_Tp> values);

    template <std::size_t _Nm> explicit Mat_(const std::array<_Tp, _Nm>& arr, bool copyData=false);

    Mat_& operator = (const Mat& m);
    Mat_& operator = (const Mat_& m);
    //! set all the elements to s.
    Mat_& operator = (const _Tp& s);
    //! assign a matrix expression
    Mat_& operator = (const MatExpr& e);

    //! iterators; they are smart enough to skip gaps in the end of rows
    iterator begin();
    iterator end();
    const_iterator begin() const;
    const_iterator end() const;

    //! template methods for for operation over all matrix elements.
    // the operations take care of skipping gaps in the end of rows (if any)
    template<typename Functor> void forEach(const Functor& operation);
    template<typename Functor> void forEach(const Functor& operation) const;

    //! equivalent to Mat::create(_rows, _cols, DataType<_Tp>::type)
    void create(int _rows, int _cols);
    //! equivalent to Mat::create(_size, DataType<_Tp>::type)
    void create(Size _size);
    //! equivalent to Mat::create(_ndims, _sizes, DatType<_Tp>::type)
    void create(int _ndims, const int* _sizes);
    //! equivalent to Mat::release()
    void release();
    //! cross-product
    Mat_ cross(const Mat_& m) const;
    //! data type conversion
    template<typename T2> operator Mat_<T2>() const;
    //! overridden forms of Mat::row() etc.
    Mat_ row(int y) const;
    Mat_ col(int x) const;
    Mat_ diag(int d=0) const;
    Mat_ clone() const CV_NODISCARD;

    //! overridden forms of Mat::elemSize() etc.
    size_t elemSize() const;
    size_t elemSize1() const;
    int type() const;
    int depth() const;
    int channels() const;
    size_t step1(int i=0) const;
    //! returns step()/sizeof(_Tp)
    size_t stepT(int i=0) const;

    //! overridden forms of Mat::zeros() etc. Data type is omitted, of course
    static MatExpr zeros(int rows, int cols);
    static MatExpr zeros(Size size);
    static MatExpr zeros(int _ndims, const int* _sizes);
    static MatExpr ones(int rows, int cols);
    static MatExpr ones(Size size);
    static MatExpr ones(int _ndims, const int* _sizes);
    static MatExpr eye(int rows, int cols);
    static MatExpr eye(Size size);

    //! some more overridden methods
    Mat_& adjustROI( int dtop, int dbottom, int dleft, int dright );
    Mat_ operator()( const Range& rowRange, const Range& colRange ) const;
    Mat_ operator()( const Rect& roi ) const;
    Mat_ operator()( const Range* ranges ) const;
    Mat_ operator()(const std::vector<Range>& ranges) const;

    //! more convenient forms of row and element access operators
    _Tp* operator [](int y);
    const _Tp* operator [](int y) const;

    //! returns reference to the specified element
    _Tp& operator ()(const int* idx);
    //! returns read-only reference to the specified element
    const _Tp& operator ()(const int* idx) const;

    //! returns reference to the specified element
    template<int n> _Tp& operator ()(const Vec<int, n>& idx);
    //! returns read-only reference to the specified element
    template<int n> const _Tp& operator ()(const Vec<int, n>& idx) const;

    //! returns reference to the specified element (1D case)
    _Tp& operator ()(int idx0);
    //! returns read-only reference to the specified element (1D case)
    const _Tp& operator ()(int idx0) const;
    //! returns reference to the specified element (2D case)
    _Tp& operator ()(int row, int col);
    //! returns read-only reference to the specified element (2D case)
    const _Tp& operator ()(int row, int col) const;
    //! returns reference to the specified element (3D case)
    _Tp& operator ()(int idx0, int idx1, int idx2);
    //! returns read-only reference to the specified element (3D case)
    const _Tp& operator ()(int idx0, int idx1, int idx2) const;

    _Tp& operator ()(Point pt);
    const _Tp& operator ()(Point pt) const;

    //! conversion to vector.
    operator std::vector<_Tp>() const;

    //! conversion to array.
    template<std::size_t _Nm> operator std::array<_Tp, _Nm>() const;

    //! conversion to Vec
    template<int n> operator Vec<typename DataType<_Tp>::channel_type, n>() const;
    //! conversion to Matx
    template<int m, int n> operator Matx<typename DataType<_Tp>::channel_type, m, n>() const;

    Mat_(Mat_&& m);
    Mat_& operator = (Mat_&& m);

    Mat_(Mat&& m);
    Mat_& operator = (Mat&& m);

    Mat_(MatExpr&& e);
};

typedef Mat_<uchar> Mat1b;
typedef Mat_<Vec2b> Mat2b;
typedef Mat_<Vec3b> Mat3b;
typedef Mat_<Vec4b> Mat4b;

typedef Mat_<short> Mat1s;
typedef Mat_<Vec2s> Mat2s;
typedef Mat_<Vec3s> Mat3s;
typedef Mat_<Vec4s> Mat4s;

typedef Mat_<ushort> Mat1w;
typedef Mat_<Vec2w> Mat2w;
typedef Mat_<Vec3w> Mat3w;
typedef Mat_<Vec4w> Mat4w;

typedef Mat_<int>   Mat1i;
typedef Mat_<Vec2i> Mat2i;
typedef Mat_<Vec3i> Mat3i;
typedef Mat_<Vec4i> Mat4i;

typedef Mat_<float> Mat1f;
typedef Mat_<Vec2f> Mat2f;
typedef Mat_<Vec3f> Mat3f;
typedef Mat_<Vec4f> Mat4f;

typedef Mat_<double> Mat1d;
typedef Mat_<Vec2d> Mat2d;
typedef Mat_<Vec3d> Mat3d;
typedef Mat_<Vec4d> Mat4d;
```



## SparseMat 

@brief The class SparseMat represents multi-dimensional sparse numerical arrays.

Such a sparse array can store elements of any type that Mat can store. *Sparse* means that only non-zero elements are stored (though, as a result of operations on a sparse matrix, some of its stored elements can actually become 0. It is up to you to detect such elements and delete them using SparseMat::erase ). The non-zero elements are stored in a hash table that grows when it is filled so that the search time is O(1) in average (regardless of whether element is there or not). Elements can be accessed using the following methods:
- Query operations (SparseMat::ptr and the higher-level SparseMat::ref, SparseMat::value and   SparseMat::find), for example:

  ```cpp
      const int dims = 5;
      int size[5] = {10, 10, 10, 10, 10};
      SparseMat sparse_mat(dims, size, CV_32F);
      for(int i = 0; i < 1000; i++)
      {
          int idx[dims];
          for(int k = 0; k < dims; k++)
              idx[k] = rand() % size[k];
          sparse_mat.ref<float>(idx) += 1.f;
      }
      cout << "nnz = " << sparse_mat.nzcount() << endl;
  ```

- Sparse matrix iterators. They are similar to MatIterator but different from NAryMatIterator.
  That is, the iteration loop is familiar to STL users:
  ```cpp
  ​    // prints elements of a sparse floating-point matrix
  ​    // and the sum of elements.
  ​    SparseMatConstIterator_<float>
  ​        it = sparse_mat.begin<float>(),
  ​        it_end = sparse_mat.end<float>();
  ​    double s = 0;
  ​    int dims = sparse_mat.dims();
  ​    for(; it != it_end; ++it)
  ​    {
  ​        // print element indices and the element value
  ​        const SparseMat::Node* n = it.node();
  ​        printf("(");
  ​        for(int i = 0; i < dims; i++)
  ​            printf("%d%s", n->idx[i], i < dims-1 ? ", " : ")");
  ​        printf(": %g\n", it.value<float>());
  ​        s += *it;
  ​    }
  ​    printf("Element sum is %g\n", s);
  ```
  If you run this loop, you will notice that elements are not enumerated in a logical order     (lexicographical, and so on). They come in the same order as they are stored in the hash table     (semi-randomly). You may collect pointers to the nodes and sort them to get the proper ordering.     Note, however, that pointers to the nodes may become invalid when you add more elements to the   matrix. This may happen due to possible buffer reallocation.

- Combination of the above 2 methods when you need to process 2 or more sparse matrices     simultaneously. For example, this is how you can compute unnormalized cross-correlation of the 2     floating-point sparse matrices:
  ```cpp
  ​    double cross_corr(const SparseMat& a, const SparseMat& b)
  ​    {
  ​        const SparseMat *_a = &a, *_b = &b;
  ​        // if b contains less elements than a,
  ​        // it is faster to iterate through b
  ​        if(_a->nzcount() > _b->nzcount())
  ​            std::swap(_a, _b);
  ​        SparseMatConstIterator_<float> it = _a->begin<float>(),
  ​                                       it_end = _a->end<float>();
  ​        double ccorr = 0;
  ​        for(; it != it_end; ++it)
  ​        {
  ​            // take the next element from the first matrix
  ​            float avalue = *it;
  ​            const Node* anode = it.node();
  ​            // and try to find an element with the same index in the second matrix.
  ​            // since the hash value depends only on the element index,
  ​            // reuse the hash value stored in the node
  ​            float bvalue = _b->value<float>(anode->idx,&anode->hashval);
  ​            ccorr += avalue*bvalue;
  ​        }
  ​        return ccorr;
  ​    }
  ```



  源码


```cpp


class CV_EXPORTS SparseMat
{
public:
    typedef SparseMatIterator iterator;
    typedef SparseMatConstIterator const_iterator;

    enum { MAGIC_VAL=0x42FD0000, MAX_DIM=32, HASH_SCALE=0x5bd1e995, HASH_BIT=0x80000000 };

    //! the sparse matrix header
    struct CV_EXPORTS Hdr
    {
        Hdr(int _dims, const int* _sizes, int _type);
        void clear();
        int refcount;
        int dims;
        int valueOffset;
        size_t nodeSize;
        size_t nodeCount;
        size_t freeList;
        std::vector<uchar> pool;
        std::vector<size_t> hashtab;
        int size[MAX_DIM];
    };

    //! sparse matrix node - element of a hash table
    struct CV_EXPORTS Node
    {
        //! hash value
        size_t hashval;
        //! index of the next node in the same hash table entry
        size_t next;
        //! index of the matrix element
        int idx[MAX_DIM];
    };

    /** @brief Various SparseMat constructors.
     */
    SparseMat();

    /** @overload
    @param dims Array dimensionality.
    @param _sizes Sparce matrix size on all dementions.
    @param _type Sparse matrix data type.
    */
    SparseMat(int dims, const int* _sizes, int _type);

    /** @overload
    @param m Source matrix for copy constructor. If m is dense matrix (ocvMat) then it will be converted
    to sparse representation.
    */
    SparseMat(const SparseMat& m);

    /** @overload
    @param m Source matrix for copy constructor. If m is dense matrix (ocvMat) then it will be converted
    to sparse representation.
    */
    explicit SparseMat(const Mat& m);

    //! the destructor
    ~SparseMat();

    //! assignment operator. This is O(1) operation, i.e. no data is copied
    SparseMat& operator = (const SparseMat& m);
    //! equivalent to the corresponding constructor
    SparseMat& operator = (const Mat& m);

    //! creates full copy of the matrix
    SparseMat clone() const CV_NODISCARD;

    //! copies all the data to the destination matrix. All the previous content of m is erased
    void copyTo( SparseMat& m ) const;
    //! converts sparse matrix to dense matrix.
    void copyTo( Mat& m ) const;
    //! multiplies all the matrix elements by the specified scale factor alpha and converts the results to the specified data type
    void convertTo( SparseMat& m, int rtype, double alpha=1 ) const;
    //! converts sparse matrix to dense n-dim matrix with optional type conversion and scaling.
    /*!
        @param [out] m - output matrix; if it does not have a proper size or type before the operation,
            it is reallocated
        @param [in] rtype - desired output matrix type or, rather, the depth since the number of channels
            are the same as the input has; if rtype is negative, the output matrix will have the
            same type as the input.
        @param [in] alpha - optional scale factor
        @param [in] beta - optional delta added to the scaled values
    */
    void convertTo( Mat& m, int rtype, double alpha=1, double beta=0 ) const;

    // not used now
    void assignTo( SparseMat& m, int type=-1 ) const;

    //! reallocates sparse matrix.
    /*!
        If the matrix already had the proper size and type,
        it is simply cleared with clear(), otherwise,
        the old matrix is released (using release()) and the new one is allocated.
    */
    void create(int dims, const int* _sizes, int _type);
    //! sets all the sparse matrix elements to 0, which means clearing the hash table.
    void clear();
    //! manually increments the reference counter to the header.
    void addref();
    // decrements the header reference counter. When the counter reaches 0, the header and all the underlying data are deallocated.
    void release();

    //! converts sparse matrix to the old-style representation; all the elements are copied.
    //operator CvSparseMat*() const;
    //! returns the size of each element in bytes (not including the overhead - the space occupied by SparseMat::Node elements)
    size_t elemSize() const;
    //! returns elemSize()/channels()
    size_t elemSize1() const;

    //! returns type of sparse matrix elements
    int type() const;
    //! returns the depth of sparse matrix elements
    int depth() const;
    //! returns the number of channels
    int channels() const;

    //! returns the array of sizes, or NULL if the matrix is not allocated
    const int* size() const;
    //! returns the size of i-th matrix dimension (or 0)
    int size(int i) const;
    //! returns the matrix dimensionality
    int dims() const;
    //! returns the number of non-zero elements (=the number of hash table nodes)
    size_t nzcount() const;

    //! computes the element hash value (1D case)
    size_t hash(int i0) const;
    //! computes the element hash value (2D case)
    size_t hash(int i0, int i1) const;
    //! computes the element hash value (3D case)
    size_t hash(int i0, int i1, int i2) const;
    //! computes the element hash value (nD case)
    size_t hash(const int* idx) const;

    //!@{
    /*!
     specialized variants for 1D, 2D, 3D cases and the generic_type one for n-D case.
     return pointer to the matrix element.
      - if the element is there (it's non-zero), the pointer to it is returned
      - if it's not there and createMissing=false, NULL pointer is returned
      - if it's not there and createMissing=true, then the new element
        is created and initialized with 0. Pointer to it is returned
      - if the optional hashval pointer is not NULL, the element hash value is
        not computed, but *hashval is taken instead.
    */
    //! returns pointer to the specified element (1D case)
    uchar* ptr(int i0, bool createMissing, size_t* hashval=0);
    //! returns pointer to the specified element (2D case)
    uchar* ptr(int i0, int i1, bool createMissing, size_t* hashval=0);
    //! returns pointer to the specified element (3D case)
    uchar* ptr(int i0, int i1, int i2, bool createMissing, size_t* hashval=0);
    //! returns pointer to the specified element (nD case)
    uchar* ptr(const int* idx, bool createMissing, size_t* hashval=0);
    //!@}

    //!@{
    /*!
     return read-write reference to the specified sparse matrix element.

     `ref<_Tp>(i0,...[,hashval])` is equivalent to `*(_Tp*)ptr(i0,...,true[,hashval])`.
     The methods always return a valid reference.
     If the element did not exist, it is created and initialiazed with 0.
    */
    //! returns reference to the specified element (1D case)
    template<typename _Tp> _Tp& ref(int i0, size_t* hashval=0);
    //! returns reference to the specified element (2D case)
    template<typename _Tp> _Tp& ref(int i0, int i1, size_t* hashval=0);
    //! returns reference to the specified element (3D case)
    template<typename _Tp> _Tp& ref(int i0, int i1, int i2, size_t* hashval=0);
    //! returns reference to the specified element (nD case)
    template<typename _Tp> _Tp& ref(const int* idx, size_t* hashval=0);
    //!@}

    //!@{
    /*!
     return value of the specified sparse matrix element.

     `value<_Tp>(i0,...[,hashval])` is equivalent to
     @code
     { const _Tp* p = find<_Tp>(i0,...[,hashval]); return p ? *p : _Tp(); }
     @endcode

     That is, if the element did not exist, the methods return 0.
     */
    //! returns value of the specified element (1D case)
    template<typename _Tp> _Tp value(int i0, size_t* hashval=0) const;
    //! returns value of the specified element (2D case)
    template<typename _Tp> _Tp value(int i0, int i1, size_t* hashval=0) const;
    //! returns value of the specified element (3D case)
    template<typename _Tp> _Tp value(int i0, int i1, int i2, size_t* hashval=0) const;
    //! returns value of the specified element (nD case)
    template<typename _Tp> _Tp value(const int* idx, size_t* hashval=0) const;
    //!@}

    //!@{
    /*!
     Return pointer to the specified sparse matrix element if it exists

     `find<_Tp>(i0,...[,hashval])` is equivalent to `(_const Tp*)ptr(i0,...false[,hashval])`.

     If the specified element does not exist, the methods return NULL.
    */
    //! returns pointer to the specified element (1D case)
    template<typename _Tp> const _Tp* find(int i0, size_t* hashval=0) const;
    //! returns pointer to the specified element (2D case)
    template<typename _Tp> const _Tp* find(int i0, int i1, size_t* hashval=0) const;
    //! returns pointer to the specified element (3D case)
    template<typename _Tp> const _Tp* find(int i0, int i1, int i2, size_t* hashval=0) const;
    //! returns pointer to the specified element (nD case)
    template<typename _Tp> const _Tp* find(const int* idx, size_t* hashval=0) const;
    //!@}

    //! erases the specified element (2D case)
    void erase(int i0, int i1, size_t* hashval=0);
    //! erases the specified element (3D case)
    void erase(int i0, int i1, int i2, size_t* hashval=0);
    //! erases the specified element (nD case)
    void erase(const int* idx, size_t* hashval=0);

    //!@{
    /*!
       return the sparse matrix iterator pointing to the first sparse matrix element
    */
    //! returns the sparse matrix iterator at the matrix beginning
    SparseMatIterator begin();
    //! returns the sparse matrix iterator at the matrix beginning
    template<typename _Tp> SparseMatIterator_<_Tp> begin();
    //! returns the read-only sparse matrix iterator at the matrix beginning
    SparseMatConstIterator begin() const;
    //! returns the read-only sparse matrix iterator at the matrix beginning
    template<typename _Tp> SparseMatConstIterator_<_Tp> begin() const;
    //!@}
    /*!
       return the sparse matrix iterator pointing to the element following the last sparse matrix element
    */
    //! returns the sparse matrix iterator at the matrix end
    SparseMatIterator end();
    //! returns the read-only sparse matrix iterator at the matrix end
    SparseMatConstIterator end() const;
    //! returns the typed sparse matrix iterator at the matrix end
    template<typename _Tp> SparseMatIterator_<_Tp> end();
    //! returns the typed read-only sparse matrix iterator at the matrix end
    template<typename _Tp> SparseMatConstIterator_<_Tp> end() const;

    //! returns the value stored in the sparse martix node
    template<typename _Tp> _Tp& value(Node* n);
    //! returns the value stored in the sparse martix node
    template<typename _Tp> const _Tp& value(const Node* n) const;

    ////////////// some internal-use methods ///////////////
    Node* node(size_t nidx);
    const Node* node(size_t nidx) const;

    uchar* newNode(const int* idx, size_t hashval);
    void removeNode(size_t hidx, size_t nidx, size_t previdx);
    void resizeHashTab(size_t newsize);

    int flags;
    Hdr* hdr;
};

```



## SparseMat_ 

@brief Template sparse n-dimensional array class derived from SparseMat

SparseMat_ is a thin wrapper on top of SparseMat created in the same way as Mat_ . It simplifies
notation of some operations:

```cpp
    int sz[] = {10, 20, 30};
    SparseMat_<double> M(3, sz);
    ...
    M.ref(1, 2, 3) = M(4, 5, 6) + M(7, 8, 9);

```

源码

```cpp

template<typename _Tp> class SparseMat_ : public SparseMat
{
public:
    typedef SparseMatIterator_<_Tp> iterator;
    typedef SparseMatConstIterator_<_Tp> const_iterator;

    //! the default constructor
    SparseMat_();
    //! the full constructor equivalent to SparseMat(dims, _sizes, DataType<_Tp>::type)
    SparseMat_(int dims, const int* _sizes);
    //! the copy constructor. If DataType<_Tp>.type != m.type(), the m elements are converted
    SparseMat_(const SparseMat& m);
    //! the copy constructor. This is O(1) operation - no data is copied
    SparseMat_(const SparseMat_& m);
    //! converts dense matrix to the sparse form
    SparseMat_(const Mat& m);
    //! converts the old-style sparse matrix to the C++ class. All the elements are copied
    //SparseMat_(const CvSparseMat* m);
    //! the assignment operator. If DataType<_Tp>.type != m.type(), the m elements are converted
    SparseMat_& operator = (const SparseMat& m);
    //! the assignment operator. This is O(1) operation - no data is copied
    SparseMat_& operator = (const SparseMat_& m);
    //! converts dense matrix to the sparse form
    SparseMat_& operator = (const Mat& m);

    //! makes full copy of the matrix. All the elements are duplicated
    SparseMat_ clone() const CV_NODISCARD;
    //! equivalent to cv::SparseMat::create(dims, _sizes, DataType<_Tp>::type)
    void create(int dims, const int* _sizes);
    //! converts sparse matrix to the old-style CvSparseMat. All the elements are copied
    //operator CvSparseMat*() const;

    //! returns type of the matrix elements
    int type() const;
    //! returns depth of the matrix elements
    int depth() const;
    //! returns the number of channels in each matrix element
    int channels() const;

    //! equivalent to SparseMat::ref<_Tp>(i0, hashval)
    _Tp& ref(int i0, size_t* hashval=0);
    //! equivalent to SparseMat::ref<_Tp>(i0, i1, hashval)
    _Tp& ref(int i0, int i1, size_t* hashval=0);
    //! equivalent to SparseMat::ref<_Tp>(i0, i1, i2, hashval)
    _Tp& ref(int i0, int i1, int i2, size_t* hashval=0);
    //! equivalent to SparseMat::ref<_Tp>(idx, hashval)
    _Tp& ref(const int* idx, size_t* hashval=0);

    //! equivalent to SparseMat::value<_Tp>(i0, hashval)
    _Tp operator()(int i0, size_t* hashval=0) const;
    //! equivalent to SparseMat::value<_Tp>(i0, i1, hashval)
    _Tp operator()(int i0, int i1, size_t* hashval=0) const;
    //! equivalent to SparseMat::value<_Tp>(i0, i1, i2, hashval)
    _Tp operator()(int i0, int i1, int i2, size_t* hashval=0) const;
    //! equivalent to SparseMat::value<_Tp>(idx, hashval)
    _Tp operator()(const int* idx, size_t* hashval=0) const;

    //! returns sparse matrix iterator pointing to the first sparse matrix element
    SparseMatIterator_<_Tp> begin();
    //! returns read-only sparse matrix iterator pointing to the first sparse matrix element
    SparseMatConstIterator_<_Tp> begin() const;
    //! returns sparse matrix iterator pointing to the element following the last sparse matrix element
    SparseMatIterator_<_Tp> end();
    //! returns read-only sparse matrix iterator pointing to the element following the last sparse matrix element
    SparseMatConstIterator_<_Tp> end() const;
};

```



## cv::Mat序列化输出示例

An example demonstrating the serial out capabilities of cv::Mat

```cpp
/*
 *
 * cvout_sample just demonstrates the serial out capabilities of cv::Mat
 *  That is, cv::Mat M(...); cout << M;  Now works.
 *
 */

#include "opencv2/core.hpp"
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;
using namespace cv;

static void help()
{
    cout
    << "\n------------------------------------------------------------------\n"
    << " This program shows the serial out capabilities of cv::Mat\n"
    << "That is, cv::Mat M(...); cout << M;  Now works.\n"
    << "Output can be formatted to OpenCV, matlab, python, numpy, csv and \n"
    << "C styles Usage:\n"
    << "./cvout_sample\n"
    << "------------------------------------------------------------------\n\n"
    << endl;
}


int main(int argc, char** argv)
{
    cv::CommandLineParser parser(argc, argv, "{help h||}");
    if (parser.has("help"))
    {
        help();
        return 0;
    }
    Mat I = Mat::eye(4, 4, CV_64F);
    I.at<double>(1,1) = CV_PI;
    cout << "I = \n" << I << ";" << endl << endl;

    Mat r = Mat(10, 3, CV_8UC3);
    randu(r, Scalar::all(0), Scalar::all(255));

    cout << "r (default) = \n" << r << ";" << endl << endl;
    cout << "r (matlab) = \n" << format(r, Formatter::FMT_MATLAB) << ";" << endl << endl;
    cout << "r (python) = \n" << format(r, Formatter::FMT_PYTHON) << ";" << endl << endl;
    cout << "r (numpy) = \n" << format(r, Formatter::FMT_NUMPY) << ";" << endl << endl;
    cout << "r (csv) = \n" << format(r, Formatter::FMT_CSV) << ";" << endl << endl;
    cout << "r (c) = \n" << format(r, Formatter::FMT_C) << ";" << endl << endl;

    Point2f p(5, 1);
    cout << "p = " << p << ";" << endl;

    Point3f p3f(2, 6, 7);
    cout << "p3f = " << p3f << ";" << endl;

    vector<float> v;
    v.push_back(1);
    v.push_back(2);
    v.push_back(3);

    cout << "shortvec = " << Mat(v) << endl;

    vector<Point2f> points(20);
    for (size_t i = 0; i < points.size(); ++i)
        points[i] = Point2f((float)(i * 5), (float)(i % 7));

    cout << "points = " << points << ";" << endl;
    return 0;
}

```



